[MUSIC]
>> Justin Meyer: The basics of JavaScript,
and this is really just a high level
overview of JavaScript, how it operates
in the browser, that kind of thing.
Our goal, and then we're gonna go into
all of these things, our goal really,
today, is to show you how
the sausage gets made.
My first question is,
to the audience, is this JavaScript?
All right, would you would you
consider this JavaScript code?
Yeah, some people not in their heads, yes.
This is kind of a, it is and
it isn't because the one thing
that a lot of people are confused with
when they begin JavaScript development,
is not understanding the difference
between JavaScript and the DOM.
What we'll see is really,
a lot of this is the DOM, but
the DOM is implemented in JavaScript.
It's the only implementation that matters.
But we'll just kind of break down
what the technologies are and
how they're used in this presentation.
So what is JavaScript?
JavaScript is a language, right?
It's a Turing complete
language that you use to,
essentially, move data around.
And there's a HTML, and that's like what,
when you go to a website,
it's just sending back an HTML document.
Almost that you can think of as a string.
And what kinda hooks these two
worlds together is the DOM.
The DOM doesn't actually have a logo.
People when they hate JavaScript,
they really tend to hate the DOM.
That's why we create a really ugly logo
for it, cuz it doesn't really have a logo.
The DOM is a interface that is
supposed to be language neutral.
So it's like if you had a Ruby program or
you had something written in C.
You could potentially have a DOM API for
it,
that allows you to manipulate HTML, listen
to event handlers and things like that.
But fundamentally, that document
getElementByID is supposed to be
an interface and not actually,
it's just one that JavaScript implements.
So we'll see how these things
relate a little bit more.
So to the best of someone in
the classroom, hopefully's ability.
What do you think happens if I go to
a page helloworld.com/index.html?
It's gonna return back this HTML.
What's gonna happen?
As specific as you can be.
Anybody adventurous enough to do this?
>> Speaker 2: You'll get a pop up that
says, hello world.
>> Justin Meyer: Good,
but can you break it down even further?
>> Speaker 2: No.
>> Justin Meyer: No, so like
what I mean is by breaking down further,
not necessarily what's the outward
appearance to the user, but
what's happening inside the browser?
>> Speaker 3: Well,
the page renders first, and
I am assuming that you get
the pop up after the h tag is displayed?
>> Justin Meyer: The pop up
after the h1 is displayed.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah.
>> Justin Meyer: That's good.
You're thinking the right way about
how things get shown in order.
But the whole situation is a little
bit more complex than that.
So, I'm gonna try to break it down.
And while I'm doing this, apologies,
if these fonts are a little bit too small.
I tried to make them as big as I could
yesterday, but I will talk through it.
So, when the user hits Enter
in the URL to go to that page,
the browser's gonna send an HTTP
request to a server, right?
So it's gonna make a GET request for
content to a server.
And the server is gonna
respond with an HTTP response.
In it it's going to include
the body of the response,
and that's gonna be the HTML,
that like the server's returning with.
Right, that's gonna look like,
in some ways a string, with an HTML head.
Essentially what we showed
on the previous page.
The browser is going to pass it off to,
when I say the DOM,
I mean the document object model.
It's gonna pass it off to
something like webkit, right.
That will start processing the HTML.
It'll parse it and
then it will start building DOM
elements up one by one, right.
So we'll see an HTML element,
it'll build a document element.
Then it'll see a head element and
append a head element to it.
And then it'll see a script tag, and
then it's gonna kick off to the java
script interpreter, okay,
this is something like V8.
All right,
this is what processes JavaScript.
And it's gonna pass that
hello world to JavaScript.
JavaScript is gonna tokenize it.
So it's gonna break it down into words,
essentially.
And then it parses that into
something like a structure like this,
an abstract syntax tree.
All right, this is kind of an intermediate
representation of the code.
And then essentially,
it's gonna do various transformations of
that to essentially something close to
like byte code really something
that the machine can understand.
And then it's actually gonna run the code,
it's gonna look up alert.
And then it's gonna call
alert with hello world.
All right, this is kinda high level
what a JavaScript engine is doing.
When the alert is called with hello world,
it's a pop up is gonna be shown, right?
It used to be this was like a system
call that would actually show a alert,
hello world, on the page.
And it's gonna freeze
JavaScript until the user and
all processing the browser is totally
going to freeze until the user hits OK.
And then it's gonna go away,
as you can see in the top left corner,
I have it going away
when they user hits OK.
And then the DOM is gonna
take over again and
it's going to see the closing script tag,
the closing head tag,
see the body tag has been opened
at a body, then add the h1.
You've got a question?
>> Speaker 4: Yeah a couple questions
from chat.
Will DOM content ready or
DOM content loaded run explicitly
before the script is executed?
>> Justin Meyer: It will not.
So the answer to that is well,
DOM content loaded won't
execute until the end of
the end of the body is hidden.
So all HTML in the document
has been processed.
Is there another one?
>> Justin Meyer: That's it,
okay.
>> Speaker 4: Well yeah,
there's a few other.
Besides WebKit,
what are the other DOM creation engines?
>> Justin Meyer: I don't know the names
of them any more, the modern ones.
I'm sure you can look up,
I don't know what there is-
>> Speaker 4: Someone else answered Gecko,
Firefox, Trident, IE.
>> Justin Meyer: Yeah,
Trident was the IE one.
But they have a new one I thought now.
It's not Trident anymore, maybe not.
Any other questions, or
should I continue on?
Yeah?
>> Speaker 5: So
when it hits that script tag it stops,
leaves the page.
It's the wrong script.
>> Justin Meyer: It doesn't
necessarily leave the page, it just stops
processing other elements in the page.
>> Speaker 5: Right.
>> Justin Meyer: So one thing is commonly
said about JavaScript is,
it's kinda single threaded, right?
There's only one thing
happening at the time.
So JavaScript will not keep processing
the body while there's JavaScript
being compiled, essentially, and executed.
>> Speaker 5: Is that why a script tags
are typically at the bottom of the page?
>> Justin Meyer: Is that why what?
>> Speaker 5: Why they're at the bottom of
the page, typically?
The script tags?
>> Justin Meyer: That's exactly why,
I was just about to say that.
That's why you should typically bottom
load your scripts and a lot of times
people top load your CSS, because
you want all of your elements built
something visible to the user before you
have to spend time loading JavaScript and
that kind of thing.
>> Justin Meyer: Cool, so yeah,
the h1 reproduced and
then h1 would show up in the page and
show hello world, which you expect.
So a little bit about, so
that's just how JavaScript on a kinda
high level operates in the browser,
the nature between it and the DOM engines.
>> Speaker 4: Justin, quick,
could you explain blocking a little bit
more, there's a few questions in chat
about that.
>> Justin Meyer: Sure, blocking isn't
blocking, like you mean that
the JavaScript just blocks
any other execution happening on the page?
>> Speaker 4: Yeah,
I think that's what, yeah.
>> Justin Meyer: So I'll try to rephrase
that, I'm not sure what
about it I could explain.
>> Speaker 4: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Justin Meyer: Okay.
So again, until alert, oops,
stepped on my cord here.
So if we had an alert and
then anything else after it,
the the browser won't run JavaScript
code until the user has clicked OK.
Essentially the code that's running
is hung up until the user hits OK and
then it starts running
JavaScript code again.
Hopefully that answers their question.
So just kind of interestingly,
there's not really another way you can you
can do something like this,
as far as I'm aware.
But if I do alert foo and
then I have just something like,
let's have it even throw an error or
something.
Until, if this code is all running here,
I won't throw the error until
this code has finished running.
Until the user actually,
not only this code is finished running,
code kinda finishes running
when the alert is shown.
But until the user actually hits OK,
the next line will not be ran.